Zlex: A lex/flex compatible scanner generator.

Copyright (C) 1995 Zerksis D. Umrigar

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation with one ADDENDUM mentioned below; either
version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
     
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
     
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program in the file GPL included in the Zlex distribution; if
not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The addendum to the GNU General Public License is as follows: Permission
is hereby given to use the output of Zlex in non-free programs.

The reason for the addendum is that the output of Zlex --- the generated
scanner file --- contains code chunks which are verbatim copies of
sizable sections of Zlex sources.  These chunks include the code for
parts of the `yylex' function, as well as code for Zlex library
functions.  If only the terms of the GPL were to be applied to the code
within the generated scanner file, the effect would be to restrict the
use of Zlex output to free software.  Hence this document amends the
terms of the GNU General Public License to explicitly allow the use of
the output of Zlex in non-free programs.

The addendum has not been added because of sympathy for people who want
to make software proprietary.  *Software should be free.* Unfortunately,
it appears that limiting Zlex's use to free software does little to
encourage people to make other software free.  So the addendum makes the
practical conditions for using Zlex match the practical conditions for
using other free tools.

Questions and comments regarding Zlex can be directed to me at
umrigar@cs.binghamton.edu

The above conditions were derived from the copying conditions published
for Bison by the Free Software Foundation, Inc.
